External Vocabulary Support (#7946)
IQSS/dataverse: conf/cvoc/readme.md

> Structure of the :CVocConf setting

Reviewer: This should be converted to .rst. I'd suggest putting it in the admin guide near metadata customization since they're related.

A fairly basic example:

    {
        "field-name": "creator",
        "term-uri-field": "creator",
        "js-url": "/resources/js/people.js",
        "protocol": "orcid",
        "retrieval-uri": "https://pub.orcid.org/v3.0/{0}/person",
        "prefix": "https://orcid.org/",
        "managed-fields": {},
        "languages":"",
        "vocabs": {
            "orcid": {
                "uriSpace": "https://orcid.org/"
            }
        },
        "allow-free-text": "true",
        "retrieval-filtering": {
            "@context": {
                "personName": "https://schema.org/name",
                "scheme": "https://schema.org/identifier"
            },
            "personName": {
                "pattern": "{0}, {1}",
                "params": ["/name/family-name/value", "/name/given-names/value"]
            },
            "@id": {
                "pattern": "{0}",
                "params": ["@id"]
            },
            "scheme": {
                "pattern": "ORCID"
            },
            "@type": "https://schema.org/Person"
        }

>     },

Author: I've moved the scripts and example materials to https://github.com/gdcc/dataverse-external-vocab-support, along with some documentation. I added info about the :CVocConf setting to the config guide and a section on External Vocab Support to the admin/metadatacustomization guide. The readme.md file itself is now in the other repo and I've applied the specific fixes from the comments there.

                "termName": "https://schema.org/name",
                "vocabularyName": "https://dataverse.org/schema/vocabularyName",
                "vocabularyUri": "https://dataverse.org/schema/vocabularyUri",
                "lang": "@language",
                "value": "@value"
            },
            "@id": {
                "pattern": "{0}",
                "params": ["@id"]
            },
            "termName": {
                "pattern": "{0}",
                "params": ["/graph/uri=@id/prefLabel"]
            },
            "vocabularyName": {
                "pattern": "{0}",
                "params": ["/graph/type=skos:ConceptScheme/prefLabel"]
            },
            "vocabularyUri": {
                "pattern": "{0}",
                "params": ["/graph/type=skos:ConceptScheme/uri"]
            }
        }
    }
    
The are some changes from the ORCID case:
* vocabs now also contains a list of vocabularyURIs. The skosmos.js Javascript uses the vocabularyURIs to query the server for terms in the specified vocabulary. Further, the script will display both a vocabulary selector and a term selector when there is more than one vocabulary listed.

> * allow-free-text is set to false to not allow input of anything except for terms in the specified vocabularies. 

Reviewer: It sounds like you can't enter random values from the GUI when "allow-free-test" is false, but what about the API?

Author: Yes. The entries are checked to see that the either start with the base URI (uriSpace element in the json) appropriate for the vocabulary(ies) or, if allow-free-text is true, that they are not a URI at all.

* languages - the languages field now contains values: the unesco and agrovac vocabularies are both available in these languages (agrovac is available in several more)

> For skosmos, the retrieval-filtering defines four elements to cache for a given term - the termName, the URI itself (as '@id'), the vocabularyName, and vocabularyUri. As skosmos is internationalized, the termName and vocabularyName returned in this case are actually an array of objects with lang/value entries specifying, for example, the termName in multiple languages. In this case, Dataverse will index the term name in all of those languages. Also note that the specified call in retrieval-uri doesn't return a vocabularyName for some skosmos vocabularies and this element may be missing from the cache. 

Reviewer: I'm confused by how the filtering works the same for both unesco and agrovoc. Are their APIs the same? Can we expect this with all vocabs we add in the future? I'm probably missing something.

Author: Generally, the form of the response from the service is protocol/service specific rather than vocabulary specific. So at that level, unesco, agrovac and other vocabs served via skosmos have the same basic api. ORCID is different and the ARDC service (where ADA has a proof-of-concept implementation) is too, so those need different filtering entries. (While skosmos does standardize, there are some differences in terms of what info is available - the vocabName not being available for agrovac is one. Another example is which languages a vocab is available in.)  In any case, the level of differences from one service/protocol are non-fatal w.r.t. populating the cache.

Present in the retrieval-filtering element in both examples is an @context. This is used to map the cached json to json-ld, which allows it to be included in the OAI-ORE export.

What is cached by Dataverse is service/protocol specific but is not specific to which metadata field is using this service. It is therefore something that is created once, aloing with the Javascript and, at some point, may be in a separate configuration property/file. 

> The final example below, shows a skosmos service being associated witha compound Dataverse field. This field is modeled after the keyword field, with the addition of a child field to store the term URI itself (which Dataverse (somewhat oddly) doesn't have an input for in the citation block keyword field).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final example below shows a skosmos service being associated with a compound Dataverse field. This field is modeled after the keyword field, with the addition of a child field to store the term URI itself (which Dataverse (somewhat oddly) doesn't have an input for in the citation block keyword field).
```

            },
        },
        "managed-fields": {
            "vocabularyName": "cvocDemoVocabulary",
            "termName": "cvocDemoTerm",
            "vocabularyUri": "cvocDemoVocabularyURI"
        },
        "retrieval-filtering": {
            "@context": {
                "termName": "https://schema.org/name",
                "vocabularyName": "https://dataverse.org/schema/vocabularyName",
                "vocabularyUri": "https://dataverse.org/schema/vocabularyUri",
                "lang": "@language",
                "value": "@value"
            },
            "@id": {
                "pattern": "{0}",
                "params": ["@id"]
            },
            "termName": {
                "pattern": "{0}",
                "params": ["/graph/uri=@id/prefLabel"]
            },
            "vocabularyName": {
                "pattern": "{0}",
                "params": ["/graph/type=skos:ConceptScheme/prefLabel"]
            },
            "vocabularyUri": {
                "pattern": "{0}",
                "params": ["/graph/type=skos:ConceptScheme/uri"]
            }
        }
    }

This example adds the field

> * term-parent-uri - skosmos allows limiting queries to a subset of a vocabulary, This parameter allows that (I don't have any description of its format handy though)

Reviewer: Remove first person and other cleanup.

To handle multiple fields, this example changes:
* field-name - the name of the parent field
* term-uri-field - the name of the child field in which the termURI will be stored
* managed-fields - a list of child field values that correspond with the information the skosmos script is able to supply, namely the term name, vocabular name and vocabulary uri. 

When the skosmos Javascript runs on this type of field, it hides all child fields and displays and allows input for the term uri as it normally would. However, when a slection is made, the script populates the values for all 4 fields. This simplfies using a controlled vocabulary service with an existing field (although a termURI field is needed and would have to be added to use skosmos with the citation.keyword field.) One limitation of this approach is that the child fields for the term and vocabular name only store the value for the current language (versus the full set of translations). 

#How to make a new Javascript for your Service/Vocabulary

> The skosmos.js and people.js scripts in this branch are good examples to start from. people.js is appropriate for single fields (it could be extendded to handle multiple fields but has not) and for services that provide a single vocabulary choice. skosmos.js is an example that handles both multiple vocabularies and managed fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The skosmos.js and people.js scripts are good examples to start from. people.js is appropriate for single fields (it could be extended to handle multiple fields but has not) and for services that provide a single vocabulary choice. skosmos.js is an example that handles both multiple vocabularies and managed fields.
```

#Status

The intent with the implementation here is to provide a working mechanism that can be used by Dataverse instances on single metadata fields in existing or custom metadata blocks and can be used on some compound fields, such as keywords, with minor/generic modification (i.e. adding a term uri child field which is probably useful regardless).

However, working with external controlled vocabularies is complex and raises many questions. There are cases such as using vocabularies from multiple services on one metadata field that are potentially valuable but not yet implemented. Handling migration of existing entries (aside from just treating them as plain text), e.g. by matching text to URIs is not supported with the existing code. There are also broader issues regarding how Dataverse should handle change over time (if vocabularies change the meaning of terms over time), how much information about the terms should be added to metadata exports and made avaialable in search, etc. where there may be better options relative to what the code currently does. There are also questions about how long services may live, whether they will move, etc. that add complexity. Etc.

> The current design is thus intended to be a useful/usable starting point, and one that has reasonable backward compatibility/fall-back capabilities (I.e. if a service goes away or you decide to no longer use it, the termURI entries, or those in compound fields, remain valid as they were and you can go back to manually entering the same information as is done today.) It is also intended to be a design where innovation/R&D can be done incrementally - scipts can be updated without changing Dataverse internals, proxy services can be plugged in as a way to populate the internal term cache or replace it, additional metadata export formats can access the information being added to the json and OAI_ORE exports now, etc.

Reviewer: I'd suggest running a spell checker for "scipts", "THe", etc.
